---
title: 'Plea for my florid writing'
date: 2023-11-25
permalink: /posts/2023/11/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - writing
  - thesis
  - dissertation
  - English as a second language
---

One significant critique of my dissertation centered on my writing style, which was described as overly florid and flamboyant. Specifically, it was pointed out that my use of synonyms was inaccurate, and the convoluted wording and descriptions did not align with the expected standards of scientific technical writing. Recognizing these issues, I aim to reevaluate the underlying problems and discuss strategies to prevent their recurrence in future work. Additionally, I will explore the influences that shaped my writing approach, particularly from the perspective of a non-native English speaker.

What was the problem?
======

Plea for my writing style
======

For me, I do not know about other foreigners and fellow Koreans, it is better to understand "Kindly bear with me for a brief moment" than "hold on a sec". Because the length of sentence gives me more time to digest the intention of the speaker, and my "alerted" status for the speaker comes and goes, so shorter sentences are sometimes harder to understand. 

Idioms, my old enemy, is another obstacle. The term, "under the weather", means somebody is sick or in a bad shape. I was a weather forecaster, and what in the world the weather can mean something about illness? I'd rather say "He/she is suffering from illness and might need to be hospitalized.", than "She is under the weather".

Oh hey, isn't it right to say "data are" but not "data is". Hell yeah. The singular form of data is datum. 

Romani ite domum
======
