---
title: "Decoding 12 million years of surface water-groundwater interactions in the southern Great Basin, USA: insights into the dynamics of long-term hydrological processes"
collection: talks
type: "Oral presentation"
permalink: /talks/2023-12-11-talk.md
venue: "AGU Fall Meeting 2023"
date: 2023-12-11
location: "San Francisco, CA"
---

While short-term interactions between groundwater (GW) and surface water (SW) have been thoroughly studied, the nature of their interaction over geologic timescales has not received equal attention. Over such extended periods, landscapes are subject to tectonic and climate forcings, which dynamically impact geomorphologic processes, such as erosion and sediment transport.
Our study reconstructs the long-term history of GW-SW interaction through an integrative numerical modeling platform that dynamically links tectonic-landscape evolution, climate, and deep groundwater flow models, providing a holistic perspective on hydrological system dynamics. This tectonic-scale (both in space and time) numerical model simulates the tectonic and climatic evolution of the southern Great Basin in the Southwestern United States from the Miocene (~12.5 Ma) to the present.

We find that the interaction between GW and SW observably impacts the landscape, as demonstrated through variations in water and sediment discharge, distinctive erosion patterns, and unique local balances between sediment and water. Additionally, it exerts a significant influence on the development of the emerging topography and the structuring of the stream network, both of which are affected by the presence of groundwater. To shed light on groundwater's impact on surface hydrological processes, we compare landscapes influenced by groundwater with those unaffected by it, quantifying these changes in the process.

This study reframes the role of GW in landscape evolution: rather than being a passive element shaped by topography, GW is an active player, modulating the flow of 'energy' across landscapes and regulating their ultimate forms under given climatic conditions. In essence, GW serves as a mediating agent that harmonizes landscape topography and the water table. Without incorporating this GW feedback, we encounter unrealistic landscape evolution and topography, resulting in discrepancies between the shapes of the landscape and the water table.

For the first time, we present changes in both GW and SW, along with concurrent changes in the landscape, on such expansive spatiotemporal scales, providing new insights into long-term hydrological dynamics and landscape evolution.
